---
title: Psychological Types
updated: 2020-10-11 09:45:47 +07:00
---
Carl Jung published Psychological Types in 1921, with the purpose to explain the problem of psychological opposites.

In the book, Jung proposes four main functions of consciousness:
* Two perceiving or non-rational functions: **Sensation** and **Intuition**
* Two judging or rational functions: **Thinking** and **Feeling**

Briefly, these mean:
* **Thinking** refers to judgement based on logic.
* **Feeling** refers to judgement based on values.
* **Sensation** refers to perception by way of the physical sense organs.
* **Intuition** refers to perception by way of an unconscious process.

These functions are then modified by two main attitude types:
*	**Extraversion** and **Introversion**.

The attitudes of consciousness refer to the basic direction in which a person's conscious energy may flow - either inward to subjective, psychological experience, or outward to the environment of objects.

From this we get eight distinct Jungian cognitive functions:
* **Extraverted Thinking**
* **Introverted Thinking**
* **Extraverted Feeling**
* **Introverted Feeling**
* **Extraverted Sensation**
* **Introverted Sensation**
* **Extraverted Intuition**
* **Introverted Intuition**

Jung proposes that the dominant function, along with the dominant attitude, characterizes consciousness, while its opposite is repressed and characterizes the unconscious. He then describes in detail the effects of tensions between the complexes associated with the differentiated dominant and inferior functions in highly one-sided types.

Jung's basic model, including the relationship between the four functions, is a quaternity. Briefly, the sensation function establishes that something exists, thinking tells us what it is, feeling tells us what it is worth, and through intuition we have a sense of what can be done with it.

Any one function by itself is not sufficient for ordering our experience of ourselves or the world around us; all four, writes Jung, are required for a comprehensive understanding.

For complete orientation all four functions should contribute equally: thinking should facilitate cognition and judgment, feeling should tell us how and to what extent a thing is important or unimportant for us, sensation should convey concrete reality to us through seeing, hearing, tasting, etc., and intuition should enable us to divine the hidden possibilities in the background, accumulatively this creates a complete picture of a given situation.

The combined notes below stem from Jung's 'Psychological Types' and Hunziker's 'Building Blocks of Personality' and look at these cognitive functions the way Jung first outlined them.

**Extraversion**

An attitude defining the self in accordance with the standard of the external world or as Jung writes *"a strong determination by the object."*

*"Now, when the orientation to the object and to objective facts is so predominant that the most frequent and essential decisions and actions are determined, not by subjective values but by objective relations, one speaks of an extraverted attitude. When this is habitual, one speaks of an extraverted type. If a man so thinks, feels, and acts, in a word so lives, as to correspond directly with objective conditions and their claims, whether in a good sense or ill, he is extraverted. Extraversion is normally characterized by an outgoing, candid, and accommodating nature that adapts easily to a given situation, quickly forms attachments, and, setting aside any possible misgivings, will often venture forth with careless confidence into unknown situations."*

**Introversion**

An attitude defining the outer world in accordance with the standard of the self or as Jung writes *"A turning inwards of the libido, whereby a negative relation of subject to object is expressed. Interest does not move towards the object but recedes towards the subject."*

*"Everyone whose attitude is introverted thinks, feels, and acts in a way that clearly demonstrates that the subject is the chief factor of motivation while the object at most receives only a secondary value. Introversion is normally characterized by a hesitant, reflective, retiring nature that keeps itself to itself, shrinks from objects and is always slightly on the defensive."*

**Thinking**

Thinking is an approach to judgement that is concerned with truth and falsity and is based upon the mechanical nature of objects and impersonal logic. It concerns itself with the comprehension of things and of their conceptual interrelationships. It is a rational, systematic process that seeks to understand reality through analysis and logical inference.

Thinking uses criteria it either pulls from the environment or synthesizes internally in order to define everything. Thinking processes need to attach a label or category to everything in order to understand its position relative to the rest of the environment, to maintain a sense of order, and to fit it into some kind of logical framework for the analysis that leads to decisions.

**Extraverted Thinking**

Extraverted thinking focuses on the objective, external world by instituting systems of organization and assigning all information to a place within an appropriate system, based upon quantifiable comparison. Extraverted thinking wants to evaluate, decide, and complete a task using a system of logical binary judgements. Extraverted Thinking prefers external data that is concrete and empirical in nature. Extraverted thinking is seen as employing a level of goal setting and results within its function properties, taking steps towards the actionable. These types tend to live by an intellectual formula and expect others to recognise and obey this formula.

*"In accordance with his definition, we must picture a, man whose constant aim -- in so far, of course, as he is a pure type -- is to bring his total life-activities into relation with intellectual conclusions, which in the last resort are always orientated by objective data, whether objective facts or generally valid ideas. This type of man gives the deciding voice-not merely for himself alone but also on behalf of his entourage-either to the actual objective reality or to its objectively orientated, intellectual formula. By this formula are good and evil measured, and beauty and ugliness determined. All is right that corresponds with this formula; all is wrong that contradicts it; and everything that is neutral to it is purely accidental.”*

This type represses the feeling function and may also neglect their own personal interests. If extreme or neurotic, they may become petty, bigoted, tyrannical or hostile towards those who would threaten their formula. Alternatively, repressed tendencies may burst out in various kinds of personal immorality.

*"The inferiority of feeling in this type manifests itself also in other ways. When the conscious attitude is extreme, all personal considerations recede from view. His health is neglected, his social position deteriorates, often the most vital interests of his family are violated - they are wronged morally and financially, even their bodily health is made to suffer - all in the service of the ideal. At all events personal sympathy with others must be impaired, unless they too chance to be in the service of the same formula. Hence it not infrequently happens that his immediate family circle, his own children for instance, only know such a father as a cruel tyrant, whilst the outer world resounds with the fame of his humanity. Not so much in spite of as because of the highly impersonal character of the conscious attitude, the unconscious feelings are highly personal and oversensitive, giving rise to certain secret prejudices, as, for instance, a decided readiness to misconstrue any objective opposition to his formula as personal ill-will, or a constant tendency to make negative suppositions regarding the qualities of others in order to invalidate their arguments beforehand-in defence, naturally, of his own susceptibility. As a result of this unconscious sensitiveness, his expression and tone frequently becomes sharp, pointed, aggressive, and insinuations multiply. The feelings have an untimely and halting character, which is always a mark of the inferior function. Hence arises a pronounced tendency to resentment. However generous the individual sacrifice to the intellectual goal may be, the feelings are correspondingly petty, suspicious, cross grained, and conservative."*

**Introverted Thinking**

Introverted thinking focuses on the subjective, internal world of underlying principles and truths by creating original systems and categories and assigning all information to a place within the appropriate framework, based upon logical analysis. Introverted thinking wants to attain internal precision through logical evaluation and decision making. It contains a set of logical principles that wishes to abstract a system or structure to its bare principles.

Introverted thinking types are deeply contemplative in the inner world of ideas concerned about fully elaborating all the possible ramifications and implications of a seminal idea.

*"Like the extravert, he too will follow his ideas, but in the reverse direction: inwardly not outwardly. Intensity is his aim, not extensity. In these fundamental characters he differs markedly, indeed quite unmistakably from his extraverted parallel. Like every introverted type, he is almost completely lacking in that which distinguishes his counter type, namely, the intensive relatedness to the object."*

To illustrate the difference in thinking Jung writes *"Darwin and Kant. The former speaks with facts; the latter appeals to the subjective factor. Darwin ranges over the wide fields of objective facts, while Kant restricts himself to a critique of knowledge in general.”*

The Introverted thinking types can seem cold, taciturn and painstakingly meticulous. They tend to avoid being noticed and to the extent they withdraw from objective reality can become totally abstract. Alternatively, the repressed feeling function may express itself in displays of childish naivety. This type can get caught up in their own ideas which they aim to think through as fully and deeply as possible and if extreme or neurotic they can become rigid, withdrawn and surly. They may also confuse their subjectively apprehended truth with their own personality so that any criticism of their ideas is seen as a personal attack. This may lead to bitterness or to vicious counterattacks against their critics.

*"With the intensification of his type, his convictions become all the more rigid and unbending. Foreign influences are eliminated; he becomes more unsympathetic to his peripheral world, and therefore more dependent upon his intimates. His expression becomes more personal and inconsiderate and his ideas more profound, but they can no longer be adequately expressed in the material at hand. This lack is replaced by emotivity and susceptibility. The foreign influence, brusquely declined from without, reaches him from within, from the side of the unconscious, and he is obliged to collect evidence against it and against things in general which to outsiders seems quite superfluous. Through the subjectification of consciousness occasioned by his defective relationship to the object, what secretly concerns his own person now seems to him of chief importance. And he begins to confound his subjective truth with his own person. Not that he will attempt to press anyone personally with his convictions, but he will break out with venomous and personal retorts against every criticism, however just. Thus in every respect his isolation gradually increases. His originally fertilizing ideas become destructive, because poisoned by a kind of sediment of bitterness. His struggle against the influences emanating from the unconscious increases with his external isolation, until gradually this begins to cripple him. A still greater isolation must surely protect him from the unconscious influences, but as a rule this only takes him deeper into the conflict which is destroying him within."*

**Feeling**

Feeling is a values-based approach to judgement. It determines what something is worth. Feeling is aware of the impact of its choices. It is aware of the individuals involved and affected, their circumstances, and their relationships. Creating and maintaining external or internal harmony is, therefore, the primary priority of the decision making. It involves judging the value of things or having an opinion about them based on our likes and dislikes. Experiences are therefore evaluated in terms of good and bad, pleasant or unpleasant, acceptable or unacceptable.

**Extraverted Feeling**

Extraverted feeling focuses on the objective, external world through using cultural value systems and assigning all things to a place within an appropriate system, based on qualitative value. Extraverted Feeling wants to make choices and initiate actions that create and maintain harmony in the outer world.

Extraverted feeling is primarily concerned with connection and commonalities to others. Since it is extraverted and objective it encapsulates the system of value outward in the form of common courtesy and etiquette. It looks for a conforming and adjusting response to objective circumstances and aims for harmonious relations with the world.

Jung writes of Extraverted feeling types as those where feeling *"loses its personal character -- it becomes feeling per se; it almost seems as though the personality were wholly dissolved in the feeling of the moment. Now, since actual life situations constantly and successively alternate, in which the feeling-tones released are not only different but are actually mutually contrasting, the personality inevitably becomes dissipated in just so many different feelings.”*

When thinking is too ignored or repressed and this type becomes extreme or neurotic, feeling may become gushing or extravagant and dependent upon momentary enthusiasms that may quickly turn about with changing circumstances. Such a person may therefore seem hysterical, fickle, moody or even to be suffering from multiple personality. Repressed thinking may also erupt in infantile, negative, obsessive ways. This can lead to the attribution of dreaded characteristics to the very objects or people that are most valued.

*"Unconscious thought reaches the surface in the form of irruptions, often of an obsessing nature, the general character of which is always negative and depreciatory. Women of this type have moments when the most hideous thoughts fasten upon the very objects most valued by their feelings. This negative thinking avails itself of every infantile prejudice or parallel that is calculated to breed doubt in the feeling-value, and it tows every primitive instinct along with it, in the effort to make 'a nothing but' interpretation of the feeling."*

**Introverted Feeling**

Introverted feeling focuses on the subjective, internal world of absolute personal value systems and assesses all things based upon whether they uphold the values, conflict with them, or have no impact. Introverted Feeling wants to make choices and act in a way that create and maintain inner harmony.

Introverted feeling is driven by inner processes and latent primordial images and is primarily concerned with authenticity, personal values and individuality. It devalues objective reality and is often rarely openly displayed. When it does appear on the surface it can seem negative or indifferent, despite the inward striving for emotional intensity.

*The existence of positive feeling can be inferred only indirectly. The aim of introverted feeling is not to adjust itself to the object, but to subordinate it in an unconscious effort to realize the underlying images. It is continually seeking an image which has no existence in reality, but which it has seen in a kind of vision. It glides unheedingly over all objects that do not fit in with its aim. It strives after inner intensity, for which the objects serve at most as a stimulus. The depth of this feeling can only be guessed—it can never be clearly grasped. It makes people silent and difficult of access; it shrinks back like a violet from the brute nature of the object in order to fill the depths of the subject. It comes out with negative judgments or assumes an air of profound indifference as a means of defence."*

The introverted feeling type can make little effort to impress others or respond to the real emotions of other people and they are often damped down and rebuffed or cooled by a negative value judgement. They can also be brooding and inaccessible and may hide behind a childish mask.

The effect of all this on other people can be stifling and oppressive. When extreme or neurotic, this type may become domineering and vain. Negative repressed thinking may also be projected so that these persons may imagine they can know what others are thinking. This may develop into paranoia and into secret scheming rivalries.

*"Although in the normal type, the tendency, above alluded to, to overpower or coerce the object once openly and visibly with the thing secretly felt, rarely plays a disturbing role, and never leads to a serious attempt in this direction, some trace of it, nonetheless, leaks through into the personal effect upon the object, in the form of a domineering influence often difficult to define. It is sensed as a sort of stifling or oppressive feeling which holds the immediate circle under a spell. It gives a woman of this type a certain mysterious power that may prove terribly fascinating to the extraverted man, for it touches his unconscious. This power is derived from the deeply felt, unconscious images; consciousness, however, readily refers it to the ego, whereupon the influence becomes debased into personal tyranny. But, wherever the unconscious subject is identified with the ego, the mysterious power of the intensive feeling is also transformed into banal and arrogant ambition, vanity, and petty tyranny. This produces a type of woman most regrettably distinguished by her unscrupulous ambition and mischievous cruelty. But this change in the picture leads also to neurosis.*

*The unconscious thinking is certainly archaic, yet its reductions may prove extremely helpful in compensating the occasional inclinations to exalt the ego into the subject. But, whenever this does take place by dint of complete suppression of the unconscious reductive thinking-products, the unconscious thinking goes over into opposition and becomes projected into objects. Whereupon the now egocentric subject comes to feel the power and importance of the depreciated object. Consciousness begins to feel 'what others think'. Naturally, others are thinking, all sorts of baseness, scheming evil, and contriving all sorts of plots, secret intrigues, etc. To prevent this, the subject must also begin to carry out preventive intrigues, to suspect and sound others, to make subtle combinations. Assailed by rumours, he must make convulsive efforts to convert, if possible, a threatened inferiority into a superiority. Innumerable secret rivalries develop, and in these embittered struggles not only will no base or evil means be disdained, but even virtues will be misused and tampered with in order to play the trump card. Such a development must lead to exhaustion. The form of neurosis is neurasthenic rather than hysterical; in the case of women we often find severe collateral physical states."*

**Sensation**

Sensing is about information gathered by the five senses. It can include memories of past sensations as well as sensations being experienced in the present. Sensing perceptions are always tangible and verifiable, even though they are not always clear or accurate. People using a sensing process prefer to live in the real world of tangible things, past or present. They want to know who, what, where and when. It fails to consider context, implications, meanings or alternative interpretations, but instead attempts to represent, factually and in detail, the information that is available to the senses. Sensing is about the immediate experience of the objective world, a process that takes place without any kind of evaluation of the experience.

Jung presented sensation as *"That psychological function which transmits a physical stimulus to perception not only to the outer stimuli, but also to the inner, i.e. to changes in the internal organs. Primarily, therefore, sensation is sense-perception, i.e. perception transmitted via the sense organs and 'bodily senses' (kinaesthetic, vaso-motor sensation, etc.)." Also, since the process of conscious perception is a psychological phenomenon representing a physical phenomenon, and not the physical phenomenon itself, he adds: "On the one hand, it is an element of presentation, since it transmits to the presenting function the perceived image of the outer object; on the other hand, it is an element of feeling, because through the perception of bodily changes it lends the character of affect to feeling."*

**Extraverted Sensation**

Extraverted sensing focuses on the current objective, external world to fully experience the details of the environment through the five senses. Extraverted sensation is the sensing function that perceives phenomena in a realistic and concrete way. Extraverted sensing concerns itself with receiving the highest physiological pleasure possible derived from objects within the environment.

Extraverted sensing types are realists who seek to experience as many concrete sensations as possible with the experiences seen as ends in themselves. Such types are sensualists or aesthetes who are attracted by the physical characteristics of objects and people. Thus they tend to like to eat, dress, and entertain well.

Jung writes of the extraverted sensation type as *"No other human type can equal the extraverted sensation-type in realism. His sense for objective facts is extraordinarily developed. His life is an accumulation of actual experience with concrete objects, and the more pronounced he is, the less use does he make of his experience. In certain cases the events of his life hardly deserve the name 'experience'. He knows no better use for this sensed 'experience' than to make it serve as a guide to fresh sensations; anything in the least 'new' that comes within his circle of interest is forthwith turned to a sensational account and is made to serve this end. In so far as one is disposed to regard a highly developed sense for sheer actuality as very reasonable, will such men be esteemed rational. In reality, however, this is by no means the case, since they are equally subject to the sensation of irrational, chance happenings, as they are to rational behaviour."*

These types tend to not be reflective or introspective, having no clear ideals except sensory enjoyment as they generally mistrust inner psychological processes and prefer to account for such things in terms of external events (like blaming their moods on the weather). If extreme, they are often crudely sensual and may exploit situations or others in order to increase their own personal pleasure. If neurotic and the unconscious is, forced out as a compensatory function and driven into open opposition the repressed intuitions begin to assert themselves in the form of projections upon the object so that they may become irrationally suspicious or jealous. Alternatively, they may develop a range of compulsive superstitions.

*"The more sensation predominates, so that the sensing subject disappears behind the sensation, the more unsatisfactory does this type become. Either he develops into a crude pleasure-seeker or he becomes an unscrupulous, designing sybarite. Although the object is entirely indispensable to him, yet, as something existing in and through itself, it is nonetheless depreciated. It is ruthlessly violated and essentially ignored, since now its sole use is to stimulate sensation. The hold upon the object is pushed to the utmost limit. The unconscious is, accordingly, forced out of its as a compensatory function and driven into open opposition. But, above all, the repressed intuitions begin to assert themselves in the form of projections upon the object. The strangest conjectures arise; in the case of a sexual object, jealous phantasies and anxiety-states play a great role. More acute cases develop every sort of phobia, and especially compulsive symptoms. The pathological contents have a remarkable air of unreality, with a frequent moral or religious colouring. A pettifogging captiousness often develops, or an absurdly scrupulous morality coupled with a primitive, superstitious and 'magical' religiosity, harking back to abstruse rites. All these things have their source in the repressed inferior functions, which, in such cases, stand in harsh opposition to the conscious standpoint; they wear, in fact, an aspect that is all the more striking because they appear to rest upon the most absurd suppositions, in complete contrast to the conscious sense of reality. The whole culture of thought and feeling seems, in this second personality, to be twisted into a morbid primitiveness; reason is hair-splitting sophistry -- morality is dreary moralizing and palpable Pharisaism -- religion is absurd superstition -- intuition, the noblest of human gifts, is a mere personal subtlety, a sniffing into every corner; instead of searching the horizon, it recedes to the narrowest gauge of human meanness."*


**Introverted Sensation**

Introverted sensing is focused on the subjective impression the stimulus or object gives. It looks at the internal world of past experience by comparing current sensory experience to similar past experiences through a vivid and detailed internal database of memories. Introverted Sensing wants to relieve the past and selectively explore the impact of and significance of current events, people and experiences. When a introverted sensing user sees an object or gets a sensation from the outer world, he absorbs an impression of it, a subjective recollection, memory, or symbol of the object.

Introverted sensing is said to compare phenomena with past experiences and is very detailed in what it detects, thus creating a level of conscientiousness and procedure in their work. It is chiefly concerned with a meticulous cataloguing of physical experiences and recalling them when the user perceives similarity in their subjective experiences of current reality. It wants things to be pinned down and concluded, mistrusting novel possibilities which leads to an adherence to traditional ways.

It is perception not based directly on the object, but is merely suggested or triggered by it. Instead layers of subjective impressions are superimposed upon the image so that it becomes impossible to determine what will be perceived from knowledge only of the object itself and therefore depends upon internal psychological processes.

Jung said introverted sensing is *“Guided by the intensity of the subjective sensation excited by the objective stimulus, but one that is apparently quite unpredictable and arbitrary. What will make an impression and what will not can never be seen in advance, and from the outside.”*

The introverted sensation type reacts subjectively to events in a way that is unrelated to objective criteria. Often this is seen as an inappropriate and uncalled-for overreaction. Because objects generally fail to penetrate directly the veil of subjective impressions, this type may seem neutral or indifferent to objective reality. Alternatively, the person may perceive the world as illusory or amusing. In extreme cases, this may result in an inability to distinguish illusion from reality. The subjective world of archaic images may then come to dominate consciousness completely, so that the person lives in a private, mythological realm of fantasy. Repressed intuition may also be expressed in vaguely imagined threats or an apprehension of sinister possibilities.

*"His unconscious is distinguished chiefly by the repression of intuition, which thereby acquires an extraverted and archaic character. Whereas true extraverted intuition has a characteristic resourcefulness, and a 'good nose' for every possibility in objective reality, this archaic, extraverted intuition has an amazing flair for every ambiguous, gloomy, dirty, and dangerous possibility in the background of reality. In the presence of this intuition the real and conscious intention of the object has no significance; it will peer behind every possible archaic antecedent of such an intention. It possesses, therefore, something dangerous, something actually undermining, which often stands in most vivid contrast to the gentle benevolence of consciousness. So long as the individual is not too aloof from the object, the unconscious intuition effects a wholesome compensation to the rather fantastic and over credulous attitude of consciousness. But as soon as the unconscious becomes antagonistic to consciousness, such intuitions come to the surface and expand their nefarious influence: they force themselves compellingly upon the individual, releasing compulsive ideas about objects of the most perverse kind. The neurosis arising from this sequence of events is usually a compulsion neurosis, in which the hysterical characters recede and are obscured by symptoms of exhaustion."*

**Intuition**

Intuition is perception focused on an expanded picture by drawing information from the environment or from within. It attempts to extrapolate from seemingly random bits of information to understand the patterns or meanings that the data represents and thus to generate connections, meanings, possibilities, options, and vision. Intuition never directly reflects reality but actively, creatively, insightfully and imaginatively adds meaning by reading things into the situation that are not immediately apparent to a purely objective observer.

Intuitive perception ignores the details and focuses instead upon the general context or atmosphere. It perceives the direction in which things are moving, the subtle inner relationships and underlying processes involved, or the latent potentialities of a situation.

*"It is that psychological function which transmits perceptions in an unconscious way. Everything, whether outer or inner objects or their associations, can be the object of this perception.”*

**Extraverted Intuition**

Extraverted intuition focuses on the objective, external world to find substantive connections and relationships between objects, people, and events in the environment. Extraverted Intuition wants to generate real-world possibilities attempting to envisage all the possibilities that are inherent in an objective situation. Ordinary events are seen as providing a cipher or set of clues from which underlying processes and hidden potentialities can be determined. Yet once these possibilities are apprehended, objects and events lose their meaning and import. There is therefore a constant need for new situations and experiences to provide a fresh stimulus for the intuitive process.

*"Because intuition is orientated by the object, a decided dependence upon external situations is discernible, but it has an altogether different character from the dependence of the sensational type. The intuitive is never to be found among the generally recognized reality values, but he is always present where possibilities exist. He has a keen nose for things in the bud pregnant with future promise. He can never exist in stable, long-established conditions of generally acknowledged though limited value: because his eye is constantly ranging for new possibilities, stable conditions have an air of impending suffocation. He seizes hold of new objects and new ways with eager intensity, sometimes with extraordinary enthusiasm, only to abandon them cold-bloodedly, without regard and apparently without remembrance, as soon as their range becomes clearly defined and a promise of any considerable future development no longer clings to them."*

Jung warns *"This attitude has immense dangers -- all too easily the intuitive may squander his life. He spends himself animating men and things, spreading around him an abundance of life -- a life, however, which others live, not he. Were he able to rest with the actual thing, he would gather the fruit of his labours; yet all too soon must he be running after some fresh possibility, quitting his newly planted field, while others reap the harvest. In the end he goes empty away."*

Extraverted intuitives are easily bored and stifled by unchanging conditions often moving from one activity to the next in the search for fresh possibilities, failing to stick to any long enough to bring it to fruition. When neurotic, repressed sensation may cause this type to become compulsively tied to people, objects or activities that stir in them primitive sensations such as pleasure, pain or fear. The consequence of this can be phobias, hypochondriacal beliefs and a range of other compulsions.

On this, Jung explained *"He rids himself of the restrictions of reason, only to fall victim to unconscious neurotic compulsions in the form of oversubtle, negative reasoning, hair-splitting dialectics, and a compulsive tie to the sensation of the object. His conscious attitude, both to the sensation and the sensed object, is one of sovereign superiority and disregard. Not that he means to be inconsiderate or superior -- he simply does not see the object that everyone else sees; his oblivion is similar to that of the sensation-type -- only, with the latter, the soul of the object is missed. For this oblivion the object sooner or later takes revenge in the form of hypochondriacal, compulsive ideas, phobias, and every imaginable kind of absurd bodily sensation."*

**Introverted Intuition**

Introverted intuition focuses on the subjective, internal world of the unconscious to find intangible connections and abstract relationships between the contents of the unconscious and/or the environment. Introverted intuition wants to discover underlying significance, systems and meaning.

Introverted intuition acts in an introverted and thus subjective manner making it a function hard to explain, due to its highly inward and intangible nature. Introverted Intuition has the ability to thread multiple sources of phenomena into a certain view or vision and thus can take on a prophetic, mystical or symbolic quality. Introverted intuition looks for future implications of the observable reality and how one chain of events leads to another.

Where extraverted intuition perceives breadth, introverted intuition seeks depth in its perceptions. It observes the physical properties of objects and perceives implications from within the inner world, where these perceptions are subjective and diluted by the subject's biases hence, these associations represent an abstract interpretation of reality that is personal to the subject. Introverted intuitive dominants always go beyond the objective physical concreteness of objects finding their own interpretation more interesting.

*"Intuition, in the introverted attitude, is directed upon the inner object, a term we might justly apply to the elements of the unconscious. For the relation of inner objects to consciousness is entirely analogous to that of outer objects, although theirs is a psychological and not a physical reality. Inner objects appear to the intuitive perception as subjective images of things, which, though not met with in external experience, really determine the contents of the unconscious, i.e. the collective unconscious, in the last resort. Although this intuition may receive its impetus from outer objects, it is never arrested by the external possibilities, but stays with that factor which the outer object releases within. Introverted intuition apprehends the images which arise from the a priori, i.e. the inherited foundations of the unconscious mind."*

Introverted intuition users often have little interest in explaining or rationalizing their personal vision, but are content merely to proclaim it. Partly as a result of this, they are often misunderstood being seen as mystical dreamers or cranks as they get too caught up in their own vision easily becoming aloof from society. The person's life can become symbolic, taking on the nature of a Great Work, mission or spiritual-moral quest. If neurotic, repressed sensation may express itself in primitive, instinctual ways leading to hypochondria, hypersensitivity and unrestrained compulsions.

*"The introverted intuitives unconscious is characterized by a compensatory extraverted sensation function of an archaic character. Whereby impulsiveness and unrestraint are the characters of this sensation, combined with an extraordinary dependence upon the sense impression. But if, through a forced exaggeration of the conscious attitude, a complete subordination to the inner perception should develop, the unconscious becomes an opposition, giving rise to compulsive sensations whose excessive dependence upon the object is in frank conflict with the conscious attitude. The form of neurosis is a compulsion-neurosis, exhibiting symptoms that are partly hypochondriacal manifestations, partly hypersensibility of the sense organs and partly compulsive ties to definite persons or other objects."*

**Referenced Work**:
- [Psychological Types by Carl Jung](https://www.amazon.com/Psychological-Types-Collected-Works-Bollingen/dp/0691018138/ref=sr_1_1?dchild=1&keywords=psychological+types&qid=1602674779&sr=8-1)
- [Building Blocks of Personality by Leona Haas & Mark Hunziker](https://www.amazon.com/Building-Blocks-Personality-Type-Discovering/dp/0692235116/ref=sr_1_1?dchild=1&keywords=building+blocks+of+personality&qid=1602674797&sr=8-1)
