---
title: Wilhelm Reich
updated: 2020-06-02 09:45:47 +07:00
---

Wilhelm Reich was an Austrian doctor of medicine and psychoanalyst, a member of the second generation of analysts after Sigmund Freud. He is the founding father of somatic psychotherapy and a seminal thinker to mind-body psychology.

Whilst he became an increasingly controversial figure in his later years, his work is criminally suppressed and under-referenced for its contribution to the mind-body literature. Before him, nobody sought to bring the body into psychology and many who came after him have been lauded for making weaker, similar or even minor additions to what he already outlined; yet he remains mostly ignored. He can also lay claim to being the only person to have his books ordered by a federal judge to be burned on United States soil, make of that what you will.

In my opinion, he is one of the most misunderstood figures of our time. Furthermore, I don't believe you need to agree with orgone physics or the orgone accumulator to see the immense value in the work he established earlier in his life. Above all else, I believe he is a truly great naturalist.

What follows is my synthesis of notes taken from my study of his earlier books and various online resources covering his key concepts and ideas.     

The foundation of Wilhelm Reich's thinking rests in the idea that our bodies carry our unacknowledged history, all the things we try to ignore or disavow. Reich believed that the body played a crucial role in an individual's expression and that the body mirrored the character of the person.

A character structure is a system of secondary traits that manifests in how an individual relates and reacts to others, various stimulus and the environment. Reich claimed our character structures are based upon blocks caused by chronic unconscious muscular contractions to ward against the conscious awareness and expression of painful feelings.

> "The body's outward appearance is an accurate reflection of what's happening inside."

**Armoring** is what Reich used to reference both *character* and *muscular armor* and it refers to the habitual patterns of muscular tension, motility, postural mis-alignments and character attitudes an individual develops to act as a defence against the breakthrough of unwanted feelings, sensations, emotions or experiences.

**Character armor** serves to protect the individual from the negative stimulus associated with pain and **Muscular armor** is the physical expression of character armor in the body. Armoring is a result of the jarring between our *impulses* and our *societal conditioning* - between what we want and what we think we should do.

Armoring holds back strong feelings from conscious attention by blocking both ***awareness*** and ***expression*** and is the sum-total of the muscular attitudes a person develops as a defence against, mostly, *anxiety*, *anger*, *fear*, and *sexual excitation*.

Reich discovered **pulsation** as a central life function and proposed that the opposite branches of the Autonomic Nervous System mediated alternating ***expansion*** and ***contraction*** of the organism in relation to the world. Reich viewed the body as an energy system in a constant state of expansion and contraction or pulsation, most easily seen through pulse and respiration. When we are armored this pulsation is interrupted and the energy flow is impeded. Healthy organisms have natural rhythmic flows of *contraction* and *expansion*, *buildup* and *release* and *charge* and *discharge* and when an organism inhibits themselves they block this rhythmic flow and create rigidity.

Armoring blocks the flow of energy throughout the body as the halted contractions inhibit energy which would otherwise be released if it were to be fully expressed.
Reich believed in a full-body emotional response to life to facilitate the natural flow of energy. If you are constantly restraining expression, you may be able to deaden pain but you will also rob yourself of joy.

Accumulatively over time armor can develop into painful sensations in the body where we are either chronically contracted or are under-charged. The longer the armor persists the more psychosomatic problems that will arise in the individual.

Reich saw that muscular armoring occurred in **seven segmental belts** around the body.
These are:   
1. Ocular (forehead, eyes, cheekbones, scalp, temple)
2. Oral (mouth, jaw, throat, jaw, ears)
3. Cervical (deep neck muscles, tongue and it's operational muscles)
4. Chest (intercostal muscles, pectorals, shoulder muscles, scapula, arms)
5. Diaphragm (the diaphragm, stomach, solar plexus)
6. Abdominal (abdominal muscles, transversus abdominis, lower back)
7. Pelvic Region (muscles of pelvis, genitals, gluteus maximus, adductors and abductors, hamstrings and lower legs)

These seven segments also relate to the seven chakra system of eastern philosophy. When all these seven segments have been opened up and the tensions and stasis in each belt dissolved energy can begin to effective flow throughout the body.

Reich used the term **orgastic potency** to refer to the capacity for an individual to surrender to the flow of energy, free of any inhibitions. It signifies the ability for the organism to discharge all excess energy and maintain a stabilized energy level.

This process of energy metabolism occurs at a four-beat rhythm of tension, charge, discharge and relaxation which Reich called the "orgasm formula". In healthy individuals, energy flows freely through the body and is built through the intake of food, fluid and air and to which is discharged by activity, excretion, emotional expression, growth, the process of thinking and conversion into body heat. Generally, more energy is built up than is discharged. To maintain a stable, economic energy level, excess energy must be discharged at regular intervals. This economic discharging of energy is the function of the orgasm.

Reich demonstrated experimentally that if repression occurs, energy was held back in the form of muscular contractions. Whilst originally drawing from Freud's working theory of libido (or libidinal energy) to describe this bodily energy, he came to believe that that it was real energy that necessitated discharge for the person to avoid the buildup of tension. Eventually, he came to the conclusion that Freud's theory was narrowly too sexual, not encompassing enough and that this energy also existed outside the body.

For this, he coined the term **Orgone energy** which refers to:
 *"subtle biophysical energy which permeates all living things."*

Similar to other names for universal life-force energies like Chi and Prana, he claimed that Orgone energy permeates all space in different concentrations. Whilst Orgone energy was left behind by those who have utilised his ideas in somatic psychotherapy, the notion of life energy is increasingly becoming more accepted as more than just an irrational esoteric concept.

With his patients, Reich focused on breaking up the character defences he saw before doing any analyses into the information they presented (contrasting most psychoanalysts). He would first look at things like how the patients held themselves and breathed and aimed to first reinstate a natural pulsation by interrupting the patient's character and dissolving their body armor. Patient character quirks were seen as a primary "defence mechanism" against the deep personal changes the therapist was trying to create.

*"Don't work with the deeper layers of the unconscious until the defense mechanisms are identified, because the resistance will hold the neurotic behavior in place even if the meanings are understood."*

**Referenced Work**:
- [Selected Writings by Wilhelm Reich](https://www.amazon.com/Selected-Writings-Introduction-Wilhelm-Reich/dp/0374501963/ref=sr_1_1?dchild=1&keywords=The+Selected+Writings+by+Wilhelm+Reich&qid=1602674846&sr=8-1)
- [Character Analysis by Wilhelm Reich](https://www.amazon.com/Character-Analysis-Wilhelm-Reich/dp/0374509808/ref=sr_1_1?dchild=1&keywords=character+analysis&qid=1602674865&sr=8-1)
- [The Function of the Orgasm by Wilhelm Reich](https://www.amazon.com/Function-Orgasm-Sex-Economic-Biological-Discovery/dp/0374502048/ref=sr_1_1?dchild=1&keywords=the+function+of+the+orgasm&qid=1602674883&sr=8-1)
